[master < T589-FL] Add storage modes (#809)
memgraph/docs: docs/reference-guide/storage-modes/in-memory-analytical.md

---
id: in-memory-analytical
title: In-memory analytical
sidebar_label: In-memory analytical
slug: /reference-guide/storage-modes/in-memory-analytical
---

> `IN_MEMORY_ANALYTICAL` mode offers no ACID guarantees besides manually created snapshots. There are no `WAL` files created or periodic snapshots. Users **can** create a snapshot manually. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
`IN_MEMORY_ANALYTICAL` mode offers no ACID guarantees besides manually created snapshots. There are no `WAL` files created nor periodic snapshots. Users **can** create a snapshot manually. 
```

> In `IN_MEMORY_TRANSACTIONAL` mode, during updates, there are [delta](../../under-the-hood/storage.md#delta-memory-layout) objects created for each change of data. Such a concept is the backbone for 
> Memgraph to provide atomicity, consistency, isolation, and durability - ACID. Using `deltas`, Memgraph creates write-ahead-logs (durability), provides isolation and consistency, and atomicity (either everything is executed or nothing). 
> 
> One big overhead with `deltas` is that they require a lot of memory (104B per change) especially when there are a lot of changes (import, i.e. `LOAD CSV` query). `IN_MEMORY_ANALYTICAL` disables the creation of `deltas` in order to provide faster import with lower memory consumption. Also, such a mode creates a speedup of import and reduces memory usage drastically - up to 6 times.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In the `IN_MEMORY_TRANSACTIONAL` mode, Memgraph creates a [`Delta`](../../under-the-hood/storage.md#delta-memory-layout) objects each time data is changed. Deltas are the backbone upon which 
Memgraph provides atomicity, consistency, isolation, and durability - ACID. By using `Deltas`, Memgraph creates write-ahead-logs for durability, provides isolation, consistency, and atomicity (by ensuring that everything is executed or nothing). 

But `Deltas` also require a lot of memory (104B per change), especially when there are a lot of changes  (for example, during import with the `LOAD CSV` clause). The `IN_MEMORY_ANALYTICAL` mode disables the creation of `Deltas` thus drastically speeding up import with lower memory consumption - up to 6 times faster import with 6 times less memory consumption.
```

## Transactions

> As there are no ACID guarantees, other transactions can see changes ongoing transactions are doing. Also, a transaction can see the changes it is doing.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
As there are no ACID guarantees, other transactions can see the changes of ongoing transactions. Also, a transaction can see the changes it is doing.
```

Reviewer: Maybe explain what this means ... This means that the transactions can be committed in random orders, and the updates to the data, in the end, might not be correct.

Or something like that

## WAL

> As mentioned, there are no write-ahead logs created during the `IN_MEMORY_ANALYTICAL` mode. When switching back to `IN_MEMORY_TRANSACTIONAL` it is recommended to create a snapshot manually. After switching, `WAL` is created
> if enabled with the config file.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
As mentioned, no write-ahead logs are created in the `IN_MEMORY_ANALYTICAL` mode. When switching back to the `IN_MEMORY_TRANSACTIONAL` mode it is recommended to create a snapshot manually with `CREATE SNAPSHOT;` Cypher query. Once Memgraph switches to the `IN_MEMORY_TRANSACTIONAL` mode, it will create a WAL if not otherwise instructed by the config file.
```

> ## Snapshots
> 
> There are two possible ways how snapshots are created in Memgraph, with periodic snapshots or with manually created snapshots.
> 
> ### Periodic snapshots
> 
> Periodic snapshots are disabled in `IN_MEMORY_ANALYTICAL` mode.
> 
> ### Manually created snapshots
> 
> Snapshots capture the database state and store it on disk. By creating a snapshot is possible later to recover the database from the stored snapshot if the configuration flag is set [--storage-recover-on-startup](../configuration.md#storage). 
> 
> When the `CREATE SNAPSHOT` transaction is started, in `IN_MEMORY_ANALYTICAL` mode Memgraph guarantees that it will be **the only** transaction present in the system, and all other transactions will wait until creating a snapshot is done. The user doesn't have to care about that, Memgraph does the job. This way, there is no way that an invalid snapshot is created.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Snapshots

Snapshots capture the database state and store it on the disk. A snapshot is used to recover the database upon startup (depending on the setting of the configuration flag `--storage-recover-on-startup`, which defaults to `true`).

In Memgraph, snapshots are created periodically or manually. 

 In the `IN_MEMORY_ANALYTICAL` mode, periodic snapshots are **disabled**.

Manual snapshots are created by running the `CREATE SNAPSHOT;` query. When the query is run in the `IN_MEMORY_ANALYTICAL` mode, Memgraph guarantees that it will be **the only** transaction present in the system, and all the other transactions will wait until creating a snapshot is done to ensure that the snapshot is valid.
```

Reviewer: previše mi je tu cjepkanja bilo

Author: okej
